[refman] Move Ltac examples to Ltac chapter. (#10079)
coq/coq: doc/sphinx/proof-engine/ltac.rst

Ltac
====

This chapter documents the tactic language |Ltac|.

We start by giving the syntax, and next, we present the informal
semantics. If you want to know more regarding this language and
especially about its foundations, you can refer to :cite:`Del00`.

> .. example::

Author: That's a very good idea.

   This command displays a list of all user-defined tactics, with their arguments.

.. _ltac-examples:

Examples of using |Ltac|
-------------------------

About the cardinality of the set of natural numbers
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The first example which shows how to use pattern matching over the
proof context is a proof of the fact that natural numbers have more
than two elements. This can be done as follows:

.. coqtop:: in reset

   Lemma card_nat :

>      ~ exists x : nat, exists y : nat, forall z:nat, x = z \/ y = z.

Author: Indeed, that's a French-speaker usual mistake: in French, “more” is generally understood in the large sense, whereas in English it is understood in the strict sense.

>      ~ exists x : nat, exists y : nat, forall z:nat, x = z \/ y = z.

Reviewer: Interesting.  Just FYI: It is a "common mistake" rather than a "usual mistake" (usual = "habitually or typically occurring or done; customary").  I would say "that's a common mistake by French-speakers" or "... by francophones".  "greater than or equal" and "[strictly] greater than" would be better than "large sense" and "strict sense" (which are pretty vague).

Of course, it's a quick comment, not something permanent.

   Proof.

.. coqtop:: in

   red; intros (x, (y, Hy)).

.. coqtop:: in

   elim (Hy 0); elim (Hy 1); elim (Hy 2); intros;

   match goal with
       | _ : ?a = ?b, _ : ?a = ?c |- _ =>
           cut (b = c); [ discriminate | transitivity a; auto ]
   end.

.. coqtop:: in

   Qed.

We can notice that all the (very similar) cases coming from the three
eliminations (with three distinct natural numbers) are successfully
solved by a match goal structure and, in particular, with only one
pattern (use of non-linear matching).

> Permutations of lists

Reviewer: Please describe what's being proved rather than the general subject area.

Also, how about an example box and title?

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A more complex example is the problem of permutations of
lists. The aim is to show that a list is a permutation of

> another list.

Reviewer: The aim statement is underwhelming.  I assume there is a null permutation, which applied to any list, gives the same list back, so the stated aim is trivial.

Also, what `problem of permutations of lists`?  Should be something more specific and interesting.

.. coqtop:: in reset

   Section Sort.

.. coqtop:: in

   Variable A : Set.

.. coqtop:: in

   Inductive perm : list A -> list A -> Prop :=
       | perm_refl : forall l, perm l l
       | perm_cons : forall a l0 l1, perm l0 l1 -> perm (a :: l0) (a :: l1)
       | perm_append : forall a l, perm (a :: l) (l ++ a :: nil)
       | perm_trans : forall l0 l1 l2, perm l0 l1 -> perm l1 l2 -> perm l0 l2.

.. coqtop:: in

   End Sort.

First, we define the permutation predicate as shown above.

.. coqtop:: none

   Require Import List.

.. coqtop:: in

   Ltac perm_aux n :=
   match goal with
       | |- (perm _ ?l ?l) => apply perm_refl
       | |- (perm _ (?a :: ?l1) (?a :: ?l2)) =>
           let newn := eval compute in (length l1) in
               (apply perm_cons; perm_aux newn)
       | |- (perm ?A (?a :: ?l1) ?l2) =>
           match eval compute in n with
               | 1 => fail
               | _ =>
                   let l1' := constr:(l1 ++ a :: nil) in
                       (apply (perm_trans A (a :: l1) l1' l2);
                       [ apply perm_append | compute; perm_aux (pred n) ])
           end
   end.

> Next we define an auxiliary tactic ``perm_aux`` which takes an argument

Reviewer: "Next we define..." suggests this text should appear before `Ltac perm_aux`.

> used to control the recursion depth. This tactic behaves as follows. If

Reviewer: ```suggestion
used to control the recursion depth. This tactic works as follows: If
```

> the lists are identical (i.e. convertible), it concludes. Otherwise, if

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the lists are identical (i.e. convertible), it terminates. Otherwise, if
```
If it terminates, the proof is complete?

> the lists have identical heads, it proceeds to look at their tails.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the lists have identical heads, it looks at their tails.
```

> Finally, if the lists have different heads, it rotates the first list by

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the lists have different heads, it rotates the first list by
```

It might be more effective to format this as pseudocode that mimics the structure of the Ltac.  Maybe add comments for much of this to the Ltac script; it will be easier to read rather than having 2 chunks of material for the user to correlate.

putting its head at the end if the new head hasn't been the head previously. To check this, we keep track of the
number of performed rotations using the argument ``n``. We do this by
decrementing ``n`` each time we perform a rotation. It works because
for a list of length ``n`` we can make exactly ``n - 1`` rotations
to generate at most ``n`` distinct lists. Notice that we use the natural
numbers of Coq for the rotation counter. From :ref:`ltac-syntax` we know
that it is possible to use the usual natural numbers, but they are only

> used as arguments for primitive tactics and they cannot be handled, so,

Reviewer: What is meant by "handled"?

> in particular, we cannot make computations with them. Thus the natural

Reviewer: ```suggestion
we cannot make computations with them. Therefore it uses
```

> choice is to use Coq data structures so that Coq makes the computations

Reviewer: This line and the next seem a bit imprecise.  AFICT it tries to explain something quite simple but doesn't quite do so.

(reductions) by ``eval compute in`` and we can get the terms back by match.

.. coqtop:: in

   Ltac solve_perm :=
   match goal with
       | |- (perm _ ?l1 ?l2) =>
           match eval compute in (length l1 = length l2) with
               | (?n = ?n) => perm_aux n
           end
   end.

> The main tactic is ``solve_perm``. It computes the lengths of the two lists

Reviewer: Move above `Ltac solve_parm`?

> and uses them as arguments to call ``perm_aux`` if the lengths are equal (if they

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and uses them as arguments to call ``perm_aux`` if the lengths are equal. (If they
```

> aren't, the lists cannot be permutations of each other). Using this tactic we

Reviewer: ```suggestion
aren't, the lists cannot be permutations of each other.) Using this tactic we
```

can now prove lemmas as follows:

.. coqtop:: in

   Lemma solve_perm_ex1 :
     perm nat (1 :: 2 :: 3 :: nil) (3 :: 2 :: 1 :: nil).
   Proof. solve_perm. Qed.

.. coqtop:: in

   Lemma solve_perm_ex2 :
     perm nat
       (0 :: 1 :: 2 :: 3 :: 4 :: 5 :: 6 :: 7 :: 8 :: 9 :: nil)
         (0 :: 2 :: 4 :: 6 :: 8 :: 9 :: 7 :: 5 :: 3 :: 1 :: nil).
   Proof. solve_perm. Qed.

> Deciding intuitionistic propositional logic

Reviewer: Example box?

The title leads me think this will tell me whether a given intuitionistic proposition is true or false/unprovable.  That's a proof, that's more of an algorithm.  What's a more accurate title?

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> Pattern matching on goals allows a powerful backtracking when returning tactic

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Pattern matching on goals allows powerful backtracking when returning tactic
```

               cut (B -> C);
                   [ cut (A -> C);
                       [ intros; clear H
                       | intro; apply H; left; assumption ]
                   | intro; apply H; right; assumption ]
           | H0 : ?A -> ?B, H1 : ?A |- _ =>
               cut B; [ intro; clear H0 | apply H0; assumption ]
           | |- _ /\ _ => split
           | |- ~ _ => red
       end).

.. coqtop:: in

   Ltac my_tauto :=
     simplify; basic ||
     match goal with
         | H : (?A -> ?B) -> ?C |- _ =>
             cut (B -> C);
                 [ intro; cut (A -> B);
                     [ intro; cut C;
                         [ intro; clear H | apply H; assumption ]
                     | clear H ]
                 | intro; apply H; intro; assumption ]; my_tauto
         | H : ~ ?A -> ?B |- _ =>
             cut (False -> B);
                 [ intro; cut (A -> False);
                     [ intro; cut B;
                         [ intro; clear H | apply H; assumption ]
                     | clear H ]
                 | intro; apply H; red; intro; assumption ]; my_tauto
         | |- _ \/ _ => (left; my_tauto) || (right; my_tauto)
     end.

> The tactic ``basic`` tries to reason using simple rules involving truth, falsity

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The tactic ``basic`` (defined with Ltac above) tries to reason using simple rules involving truth, falsity
```

and available assumptions. The tactic ``simplify`` applies all the reversible
rules of Dyckhoff’s system. Finally, the tactic ``my_tauto`` (the main

> tactic to be called) simplifies with ``simplify``, tries to conclude with

Reviewer: "The tactic ``simplify`` applies all the reversible rules of Dyckhoff’s system." needs some unpacking, at least for me.  Does simplify do this out of the box?

> tactic to be called) simplifies with ``simplify``, tries to conclude with

Reviewer: ```suggestion
tactic) simplifies with ``simplify``, tries to conclude with
```

``basic`` and tries several paths using the backtracking rules (one of the
four Dyckhoff’s rules for the left implication to get rid of the contraction

> and the right ``or``).

Reviewer: Maybe more readable to integrate this text as comments in the code.

Having defined ``my_tauto``, we can prove tautologies like these:

.. coqtop:: in

   Lemma my_tauto_ex1 :
     forall A B : Prop, A /\ B -> A \/ B.
   Proof. my_tauto. Qed.

.. coqtop:: in

   Lemma my_tauto_ex2 :
     forall A B : Prop, (~ ~ B -> B) -> (A -> B) -> ~ ~ A -> B.
   Proof. my_tauto. Qed.

Deciding type isomorphisms
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> A more tricky problem is to decide equalities between types modulo

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A trickier problem is to decide equalities between types modulo
```

           (simplify_type A; try simplify_type_eq) ||
           (simplify_type B; try simplify_type_eq)
   end
   with simplify_type_eq :=
   match goal with
       | |- ?A = ?B => try simplify_type A; try simplify_type B
   end.

.. coqtop:: in

   Ltac len trm :=
   match trm with
       | _ * ?B => let succ := len B in constr:(S succ)
       | _ => constr:(1)
   end.

.. coqtop:: in

   Ltac assoc := repeat rewrite <- Ass.

.. coqtop:: in

   Ltac solve_type_eq n :=
   match goal with
       | |- ?A = ?A => reflexivity
       | |- ?A * ?B = ?A * ?C =>
           apply Cons; let newn := len B in solve_type_eq newn
       | |- ?A * ?B = ?C =>
           match eval compute in n with
               | 1 => fail
               | _ =>
                   pattern (A * B) at 1; rewrite Com; assoc; solve_type_eq (pred n)
           end
   end.

.. coqtop:: in

   Ltac compare_structure :=
   match goal with
       | |- ?A = ?B =>
           let l1 := len A
           with l2 := len B in
               match eval compute in (l1 = l2) with
                   | ?n = ?n => solve_type_eq n
               end
   end.

.. coqtop:: in

   Ltac solve_iso := simplify_type_eq; compare_structure.

> The tactic to judge equalities modulo this axiomatization is shown above.

Reviewer: judge?  Is that a technical term?  Not too clear to me.

Author: I don't think so.

The algorithm is quite simple. First types are simplified using axioms that

> can be oriented (this is done by ``simplify_type`` and ``simplify_type_eq``).

Reviewer: "oriented" meaning?

> The normal forms are sequences of Cartesian products without Cartesian product

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The normal forms are sequences of Cartesian products without a Cartesian product
```

> in the left component. These normal forms are then compared modulo permutation

Reviewer: People seem to love this term "modulo".  It seems to me it's more of a metaphor than anything precise.  I don't what really means.

Reviewer 2: Given an equivalence relation R over a set X, doing something modulo R means that you're working in the quotient X / R.

Reviewer: Thanks.

of the components by the tactic ``compare_structure``. If they have the same

> lengths, the tactic ``solve_type_eq`` attempts to prove that the types are equal.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
length, the tactic ``solve_type_eq`` attempts to prove that the types are equal.
```

> The main tactic that puts all these components together is called ``solve_iso``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The main tactic that puts all these components together is ``solve_iso``.
```

   This command displays a list of all user-defined tactics, with their arguments.

.. _ltac-examples:

Examples of using |Ltac|
-------------------------

> About the cardinality of the set of natural numbers

Author: ```suggestion
Proof that the natural numbers have at least two elements
```

> ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Author: ```suggestion
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
```

> .. example:: About the cardinality of the set of natural numbers

Author: ```suggestion
.. example:: Proof that the natural numbers have at least two elements
```
